#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/uprint/uprint-lpq.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2004, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
# 
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
# 
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 11 December 2004.
#

=head1 NAME

uprint-lpq - Shows print jobs

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<uprint-lpq> [B<-P> I<queue>] [B<-l>] [I<user>] [I<job number>] ...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is part of the PPR uprint suite.  See the UPRINT(1) man page
for an explaination of what this means.

This program is used to view print queues.  The B<-P> switch can be used
to specify the queue to be viewed.  If the B<-P> switch is not used then the
queue specified by the environment variable PRINTER is shown.  If the PRINTER
environment variable is not defined then the queue specified by the item
"uprint-lpr=" in the "[default destinations]" section of F<uprint.conf> is
displayed.  If that too is undefined then the queue called "lp" is shown
(assuming it exists).

If the B<-l> switch is used then a more verbose queue listing format is used.

If user names or job numbers appear on the command lines then only jobs
which are owned by one of those users or have one of the ids specified are
shown.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut

