#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/uprint/uprint-lprm.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2004, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
# 
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
# 
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 11 December 2004.
#

=head1 NAME

uprint-lprm - Deletes print jobs

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<uprint-lprm> [B<-P> I<queue>] [B<->] [B<job number>] [B<user>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is part of the PPR Uprint suite.  See the UPRINT(1) man page
to learn about the Uprint suite.

The program B<uprint-lprm> is used to delete print jobs.  On your system,
the B<lprm> command may be an alias for B<uprint-lprm>.

There are several ways to indicate which queue one wants to remove a job from.
If the B<-P> switch is used, it overrides all other settings.  If the B<-P>
switch is not used, then B<uprint-lprm> falls back on the PRINTER environment
variable.  If the PRINTER environment variable is not defined, then it looks
for a "uprint-lpr=" setting in the "[default destinations]" section of
F<uprint.conf>.  If that too is not set, then B<uprint-lprm> assumes a queue
name of "lp".

There are three ways to specify which jobs within the selected queue should
be deleted.

If one or more job id numbers are specified, then the jobs with those id
numbers will be deleted.

If one or more user names are specified, then all jobs owned by those users
will be deleted.  Since ordinary users may not delete other people's jobs,
this option is only useful to the user "root".  (Note that PPR operators cannot
delete other people's jobs with B<uprint-lprm> as they can with B<ppop>.)

If the B<-> option is used, then all job belonging to the user who is running
B<lprm> are deleted.  If the user "root" is the one running B<lprm>, then all
jobs in the queue are deleted.

Note that if the remote server is running PPR's B<lprsrv>, then the definition
of "all jobs owned by this user" or "all jobs in the queue" may be limited
to those jobs submitted from the network node on which B<lprm> is being run.
However, the "proxy class=" setting in the F<lprsrv.conf> file can be used to
expand this scope at least somewhat.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut

