#
# uprint-remote.conf.5.pod
# Copyright 1995--1999, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
# documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided
# that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that
# copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
# documentation.  This software and documentation are provided "as is" without
# express or implied warranty.
#
# Last modified 12 August 1999.
#

=head1 NAME

uprint-remote.conf - Remote printer configuration file for Uprint

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This file is normally found in the F</etc/ppr> directory.  It lists
LPR/LPD (RFC 1179) print queues, generally on remote systems, to which
users of the Uprint system can send jobs.  When a program using the Uprint
library asks for a particular print queue, the Uprint library searches PPR,
then the native spooling system, then it searches F<uprint-remote.conf>.
The first spooler that claims the queue as its own gets the job.

Each section in F<uprint-remote.conf> begins with a queue name in square
brackets.  The queue name can contain shell-style wildcards.  Wildcards
are generally used to create a default entry which sends jobs for unknown
printers off to a certain print server for resolution.  If the requested
queue matches more than one section, the first match wins.

Within each section are lines with name=value pairs.  These name=value pairs
describe the remote queue.  Here are the things which can be set:

=over 4

=item B<remote host => I<address>

This specifies the IP address or DNS name of the computer the jobs should
be sent to.  Alternatively, this may be a space or comma separated list of
computers to try.  The first one which accepts a connexion will be used.

=item B<remote printer => I<name>

This specifies the name by which the queue is known on the remote host.  If
this setting is omitted it defaults to the local name.

=item B<osf extensions => I<boolean>

This indicates whether OSF1 (Digital Unix) extensions to RFC 1179 should be
used.  These allow selection of duplex modes, N-Up, input and output trays,
and other things.  The default is B<no>.

=item B<solaris extensions => I<boolean>

This indicates whether Sun Solaris extensions to RFC 1179 should be used.
These allow selection for forms, character sets, additional content types,
filter modes, and other things.  The default is B<no>.

=item B<ppr extensions => I<boolean>

This indicates whether PPR extensions to RFC 1179 should be used.
With these extensions B<uprint-lp> and B<uprint-lpr> will pass
the values of PPR_RESPONDER, PPR_RESPONDER_ADDRESS, and PPR_RESPONDER_OPTIONS
as parameters to the B<ppr> command run on the remote system if
PPR_RESPONDER_ADDRESS contains an "@".  The default is B<no>.

=item B<remote system type => I<system> I<version>

This option chooses the RFC 1179 extensions which are appropriate for the
receiving system.  That way, you don't have to figure out which extensions your system
supports.

The known receiving system types are "BSD", "SUNOS", "Solaris", "PPR",
"WinNT", and "RedHat".  In most cases, the version should be the operating
system version number (a floating point number).
In the case of "RedHat", the version number should be the RedHat distribution
version number, not the Linux kernel version.
If the remote system is running B<lprsrv>, don't use the operating system
name and version, the system
name should be "PPR" and the version number should be the PPR version.

The Uprint library uses an internal table of system types and versions to
decide which extensions to enable.  This table is found in the source
file F<libuprint/claim_remote.c>.  Please send corrections to this table
to ppr-bugs@mail.trincoll.edu.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Here is an entry which defines a queue called "sol_bigprn" which prints on a
remote queue called "bigprn" on a Solaris 2.6 server "sol.myorg.org":

 [sol_bigprn]
   remote printer = bigprn
   remote host = sol.myorg.org
   remote system type = solaris 2.6

The line "remote system type = solaris 2.6" enables those protocol extensions
appropriate for Solaris 2.6 (SunOS 5.6).  Note that this section would
have the same effect:

 [sol_bigprn]
   remote printer = bigprn
   remote host = sol.myorg.org
   solaris extensions = yes

Here is an entry for a queue called "chipmunk" which prints to a queue of the
same name on a remote system called "lun.myorg.org".  Lun is running PPR version
1.40:

  [chipmunk]
    remote host = lun.myorg.org
    remote system type = ppr 1.40

This example is like the one above, but it defines a backup print server to
be used when "lun.myorg.org" doesn't respond:

  [chipmunk]
    remote host = lun.myorg.org, lun2.myorg.org
    remote system type = ppr 1.40

This entry sends all jobs for queues whose names begin with "mcec_" to
"shakti.myorg.org".  Shakti is running BSD 4.3 Unix:

  [mcec_*]
    remote host = shakti.myorg.org
    remote system type = bsd 4.3

This entry sends jobs for queues not matched by any of
the sections above to the server "bigjohn.myorg.org".
Bigjohn is running RedHat Linux 5.1.  This entry should be the last
one in the file, otherwise it will `steal' jobs away from
other queues:

  [*]
    remote host = bigjohn.myorg.org
    remote system type = redhat 5.1

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut

