#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/uprint/uprint-lpr.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2004, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
# 
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
# 
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 3 March 2004.
#

=head1 NAME

uprint-lpr - selects spooler and submits print job

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<uprint-lpr> I<switches> [I<filename1> [I<filename2>] ... ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is part of the PPR uprint suite.  See the UPRINT(1) man page
for an explanation of what this means.

Your system administrator may have choosen to replace F</usr/bin/lpr>
with a link to this program.

This program is designed to be a drop-in replacement for the B<lpr> from BSD Unix.
It also accepts some of the options accepted by enhanced versions of B<lpr> found
on certain other Unix systems such as DEC OSF.  It follows traditional B<lpr> semantics
as closely as possible.  

These are the option that B<uprint-lpr> accepts:

=over 4

=item B<-P> I<queuename>

Use this option to select a print queue.  If this option is omited, then
the queue name is read from the environment variable PRINTER.  If PRINTER
is not defined then the queue name will be read from the "uprint-lpr=" entry
in the "[default destinations] section of F<uprint.conf>.  If that too is
missing then the queue be "lp".

Note that B<uprint-lpr> without the B<-P> option may choose
a different queue that B<ppr> or B<uprint-lp> without the B<-d> option would.

=item B<-m>

Send email when the job is done.

=item B<-#> I<n>

Print the indicated number of copies.

=back

=head2 Input File Type Options

=over 4

=item B<-p>

The files are plain ASCII text which should be passed through B<pr> before
printing.

=item B<-l>

The files are in some sort of line printer format.  Control characters should
be preserved and no attempt should be made to insert page breaks.

=item B<-f>

The files use FORTRAN carriage control.

=item B<-c>

The files are cifplot(1) output.

=item B<-g>

The files are plot(1) output.

=item B<-d>

The files are TeX DVI output.

=item B<-n>

The files are Ditroff (modern Troff) output.

=item B<-t>

The files are old Troff (CAT/4 typesetter format) output.

=item B<-v>

The files are raster images suitable for the "Benson Varian", whatever
that is.

=back

=head2 Banner Page Options

=over 4

=item B<-h>

Don't print a banner page.

=item B<-C> I<string>

Set the job classification to be printed on the banner page.  If this switch
is ommited then the name of the computer from which the job origionated will
be used instead.  (Exactly what a "job classifcation" is is unclear.)

=item B<-J> I<string>

Set the job name for queue listings and banner pages.

=item B<-T> I<string>

Select the title to appear in the running heads created by B<pr>.  (Obviously,
or not so obviously, this switch only makes a difference in combination
with the B<-p> switch.)

=back

=head2 Other Standard Options

=over 4

=item B<-r>

Delete the job when printing is done.

=item B<-s>

Don't make a copy of the files, just make symbolic links to them.  If you use
this then you probably shouldn't modify the files until printing is done.
In many cases, Uprint will ignore this option and make its own copy of the
files anyway.

=item B<-1 I<fontname>>

=item B<-2 I<fontname>>

=item B<-3 I<fontname>>

=item B<-4 I<fontname>>

Select fonts to be mounted in Troff font positions 1 through 4.

=item B<-i> I<n>

Specifies a number of blanks as a left margin.  The default is supposedly 8.
It is unclear when this switch is supposed to be effective.  It probably
will have an effect when printing plain ASCII text (no file type switch)
and when using the B<-p> switch.

=item B<-w> I<n>

This specifies the page width (in columns) for B<pr>.

=item B<-U> I<user>

Supposedly, this switch is used specify the owner of this job.  Only certain
users can use it.  It is used by filters that requeue jobs.  At least that
is what the BSD lpr(1) man page says.  Likely, this switch does not work
correctly in B<uprint-lpr>.

=back

=head2 OSF/1 and Digital Unix Compatibility Options

The B<lpr> program in OSF/1 and Digital Unix has additional options.
B<Uprint-lpr> understands these additional options.

=over 4

=item B<-I> I<trayname>

Specifies the input tray name.  Valid values depend on the queue.  For PPR
queues this will be the tray name from the PPD file.  There will probably
not be any warning if you select a non-existent tray.

=item B<-K> I<duplexmode>

This option selects double sided printing.  It can also be used to select
printing modes which are useful when the printing will be done on one
side but will be photocopied onto two sides.  Here are the options:

The various duplex modes control three things.  On is how many sides of the
page are used.  The other is, if both sides are used, how is the page flipped.
The third thing is page layout.

Page layout often changes according to how a document will be bound.
When a document is going to be bound
along one edge it is customary to make that margin a little wider.  If a
document is printed on one side only and bound along the left hand edge,
the extra space is added to the left margin.  If it is printed on two sides
and bound on the left hand edge then the extra space is added to the left
margin on odd numbered pages and to the right margin on even numbered pages.
This extra space is sometimes called a gutter.  Also, if page numbers are
printed and they are printed off center then when printing on two sides they
are generall placed on the right on odd numbered pages and on the left on
even numbered pages.

=over 4

=item<one_sided> or B<1> or B<one_sided_simplex>

This is the default.  Page are printed on one side.  Where the spooler can
adjust margins, it will put any "gutter" (extra space for the bound edge)
on the left hand side.

=item B<two_sided> or B<2> or B<two_sided_duplex>

The document is printed on both sides of the paper.  This is probabaly
the duplex option you want.  The pages are flipped over the long edge
(generally the left edge, like most books).  If a gutter is used,
it will alternate between the left and right margins.

=item B<tumble> or B<two_sided_tumble>

The document is printed on both sides of the paper.  The pages
are flipped over the short edge (generally the top edge, like
most calendars).  If a gutter is used, it will alternate between
the top and buttom margins.

=item B<one_sided_duplex>

The document is printed on one side of the paper only, but if there
is a gutter it alternates betwen the left and right margins.  The idea is
that the finished pages can then be photocopied onto both sides.

=item B<one_sided_tumble>

This is like B<one_sided_duplex> but the gutter alternates between the top
and bottom margins.

=item B<two_sided_simplex>

The document is printed on both sides of the paper (duplexed) but the
gutter is always added to the left margin.  It is unclear why you might want
to do this.  The option is probably present only for the sake of completeness.

=back

=item B<-O> I<orientation>

This selects the orientation of the output.  The choices are "portrait"
and "landscape".  In the case of a PPR queue this parameter will only make
a difference if the input file must be converted to PostScript, and then
only if the filter understands the "orientation=" option.

=item B<-j>

Print the jobid.

=item B<-N> I<n>

Print the pages N-Up.

=item B<-o> I<n>

=item B<-o> I<tray>

This option specifies the output tray.  The Digital Unix lpr(1) man page says
that the parameter should be a number, but for a PPR queue it should be an
output tray name.  The output tray name should be one of the machine
readable names mentioned in the PPD file.  If you select a non-existent
output tray there will be no warning
and the job will probably be sent to an output tray you did not intend.

=item B<-x>

Indicates that the file does not require filtering before printing.
This option may not work when printing to PPR queues.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=head1 BUGS

Many options are simply passed to the remote spooler without any validity
checking.  This means that incorrect options will often simply be ignored.

=cut

