#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppd2macosdrv.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 6 March 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppd2macosdrv> - convert PPD files to MacOS format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppd2macosdrv>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program converts PPR's PPD file collection to Macintosh format so that
you can use them with LaserWriter 8.x.  This conversion involves changing
the line termination to carriage return and renaming the files so that the
name of each is the PostScript product name.  Once this has been done, you
can copy the files you want to the F<Printer Descriptions> folder within the
F<Extensions> within your Macintosh's system folder.

=head1 FILES

The converted PPD files are deposited in F</var/spool/ppr/drivers/macos/>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
