#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-web.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2005, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 15 October 2005.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-web> - Open PPR's Web-based Control Panel

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-web> [B<-d> I<destname>] [I<filename>] ... ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This command attempts to open the PPR web interface in a web browser.  It tries
to pick the browser which best renders the web interface.  There is one search
list if B<ppr-web> is run under the X Window System and another search list
if it is run in text mode.

The prefered browser in X-Windows mode is Mozilla Firefox followed by the browser
from the Mozilla suite, Konqueror and Dillo.  The prefered browser in text mode is
Links followed by W3m and Lynx.

=head2 Control Panel

If no arguments are supplied, then the PPR control panel will be opened in a web 
browser window.

=head2 Queue Display and Control

To skip the PPR control panel and open a print queue in a web browser window, use B<-d>
I<destname>.  For example:

	$ ppr-web -d myprn

=head2 Job Submission

If B<-d> I<queuenname> is used and additional arguments follow, then they
are understood to be the names of files to be printed on the indicated
printer.  There will be no GUI manifestation of this operation, though a
print dialog is planned for the future.

=head2 GUI Icons and Menu Entries

If you are running a GUI such as KDE or Gnome which has desktop icons or a
start menu, this command can be used as the the action command.

If the icon or menu entry is configured to run B<ppr-web> without arguments,
then when you double click on the icon or select the menu entry the web
interface's control panel will be opened in a web browser window as described
in section Control Panel above.

If the icon or menu entry is configured to run B<ppr-web> with the arguments
B<-d> I<queuename>, then double clicking on the icon or selecting the menu
entry will open the print queue in a web browser window as described in section
Queue Display and Control above.  If you drop files it, the files will be submitted for
printing as described in section Job Submission above.

To create such an icon or menu entry in the dotdesktop format which is used by
KDE and Gnome, click on the queue's icon in the web interface Control Panel and
choose the B<Client Configuration> item.  You will be able to choose to create
an KDE/Gnome icon.  You can save the icon on your desktop (or anywhere else for
that matter).

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2005.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
