#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-xgrant.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2005, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 23 September 2005.
#

=head1 NAME

ppr-xgrant - Grant PPR spooler access to X display

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-xgrant>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The program B<ppr-xgrant> resides in F</usr/lib/ppr/bin>.

The B<xwin> responder will not work unless the user "ppr" has permission to pop
up windows on your X-Windows display.  You could use the B<xhost> command to
allow all processes on the computer to pop up windows, but on a multi-user
system it is probably better to run B<ppr-xgrant> to copy the magic cookie
from your F<.Xauthority> file to ppr's F<Xauthority> file.  That way, an
unnecessarily broad grant of access is avoided.

Rather than execute this program directly, it is recommended that you use
B<ppr-followme> to select the B<xwin> responder.  B<ppr-followme> will
in turn execute B<ppr-xgrant> in order to grant PPR the necessary permissions.

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2005.
It was first released to the public on 26 April 1995.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
