#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-indexfonts.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 21 February 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-passwd> - Change a password for the PPR web interface

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-passwd> [B<--add>] [B<--delete>] I<username>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is used to edit the password file for the PPR web interface. 
The web interface needs its own password file in order to support MD5 Digest
HTTP authentication.

If no I<username> is specified, then the invoking users own password will be
changed.  Users listed in B</etc/ppr/acl/passwd.allow> (as well as root and
ppr) may change other people's passwords and needn't know the old password.

This program supports the following options:

=over 4

=item B<--add>

=item B<-a>

Add the user to the password file if he doesn't already exist.

=item B<--delete>

=item B<-x>

Delete the user from the password database.

=item B<--help>

Prints a short usage summary.

=item B<--version>

Prints the PPR version number and copyright information.

=back

=head1 FILES

The password file whic this program modifies is F</etc/ppr/htpasswd>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
