#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-config.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 12 February 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-config> - Configuration tool for PPR addons

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-config> [--version] [--mk] [--sh] [--ph] [--pm] [--confdir] [--homedir] [---sharedir] [--var-spool-ppr]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program will print configuration information about the installed copy
of PPR.  Programs that extend PPR should use it to locate PPR's installation
directories and to obtain other configuration information.

=over 4

=item --version

Print the PPR version number.

=item --mk

Print a makefile fragment, suitable for including in a makefile.

=item --sh

Print a shell script fragment, suitable for including in a Borne shell
script.

=item --ph

Print a Perl header file containing PPR configuration information, suitable for 
including using B<require>.  (PPR's F<paths.ph> is created by this command.)

=item --pm

Print a Perl module containing PPR configuration information, suitable for
including using B<use>.  (PPR's F<paths.pm> is created by this command.)

=item --confdir

Print the path of PPR's configuration directory.

=item --homedir

Print the path of PPR's home directory.

=item --sharedir

Print the path of PPR's share directory.

=item --var-spool-ppr

Print the path of PPR's spool directory.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
