#
# ppr-filters.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2002, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
# documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided
# that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that
# copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
# documentation.  This software and documentation are provided "as is" without
# express or implied warranty.
#
# Last modified 2 January 2002.
#

=head1 NAME

ppr-filters - programs to convert file to PostScript

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This man page also describes the filters which PPR can invoke in order to
convert the input file to PostScript.  A number of filters are supplied with
PPR.  These include a line printer filter, a Fortran carriage control
filter, and a dot matrix printer language filter.  Other filters are
available if certain common Unix programs such as Troff, TeX, and NetPBM are
available.

The filters programs are stored in the directory F</usr/lib/ppr/filters>.  They have
names consisting of "F<filter_>" followed by the PPR file type name as would
be used with the B<-T> switch.  For example, the filter for files of type "dvi" is
F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_dvi>.  If the necessary filter does not exist, the job
will be rejected.

Some of PPR's filters are complete programs which come with PPR.  Others are
simply shell scripts which use other programs to do the real work.  These
other programs include TeX, Dvips, Troff, Groff, and PBMPlus.

When PPR is installed, the B<fixup> script runs a subsidiary script called
"F</usr/lib/ppr/fixup/fixup_filters>".  If it finds the necessary programs are found
in the PATH, it will generate shell script filters for "tex", "dvi" "ditroff", 
"cat4", "jpeg", "gif", "tiff", "plot"", "pdf", and other formats.  If, after 
PPR is installed, you add programs which might be usable as filters, you should
run F</usr/lib/ppr/fixup/fixup_filters> again.

=head2 Available Filters

These are the input file types which PPR can convert to PostScript.  They
are listed according to the B<-T> switch which would be used to inform PPR
that the input file is of that type.  Normally PPR will determine the 
correct filter automatically.

=over 4

=item B<-T lp>

indicates that input file is formated for a line printer or is unformatted
ASCII text.  You might use B<-T lp> to print a listing of a PostScript program
since otherwise, PPR would send it directly to the printer where it would be
executed.

This filter supports many B<-o> options.  These are described in the section
which describes the B<-o> switch.

The default value for the B<charset=> option is B<ISOLatin1>.  The default for
toe B<fontfamily=> option is B<fixed>.

This filter supports the B<gutter=> option which specifies an amount to be
added to the margin on the side on which the paper will be bound.  The
effect of the B<gutter=> option is influenced by the setting of the
B<duplex=> option.  With B<duplex=undef>, the B<gutter=> option has no
effect.  With B<duplex=none> the gutter is added to the left hand margin.
With B<duplex=notumble> the gutter is added to one of the long edge margins,
the left one on odd numbered pages, the right one on even numbered pages.
With B<duplex=tumble> the gutter width is added to a short edge margin, the
top one on odd numbered pages, the bottom one on even numbered pages.

This filter supports the B<orientation=> option.  If no B<orientation=>
option is used or B<orientation=auto> is used, then the orientation will be
decided upon automatically.

If the orientation is to be decided automatically, then the descision is
based upon the parameters B<landscape_lentrigger=> and
B<landscape_asptrigger=>.  These parameters are described in detail in the
section for the B<-o> switch.

=item B<-T lp_autolf>

indicates that the input file is formated for a line printer that
automatically performs a line feed on carriage return or is unformatted
ASCII text that uses a single carriage return to indicate end of file.
(This is the format of Macintosh text files.)  This is nearly the
same filter as for B<-T lp> above and it supports the same options.

=item B<-T fortran>

indicates that the input file employs Fortran carriage control.  The only
control code which actually does anything is "1".  This filter is a variant
of B<-T lp> above and supports the same options.

=item B<-T pr>

indicates that the job should be passed through pr before being printed.
After it is passed through pr it is passed through PPR's line printer
emulator.  This instance of the B<-T> switch does not truly indicated the
type of the input file, it is just a convenient way to get files formated
and printed.

It is assumed that the file you print is compatible with
your system's version of B<pr>.  Your system's B<pr> may have trouble
with files with non-Unix line termination.

Normally, the file name or the string specified with the B<--title> switch (if present) 
will be used as the title.  You may override the title with the B<-o title=> option.

The B<-o> option "B<width=>" specifies the value for B<pr>'s B<-w> switch and 
B<length=> specifies a value for B<pr>'s B<-l> option.  Since, after being 
processed by B<pr>, the file is passed through the "lp" filter, lines will be
wrapped at the length specified by the B<-o width=> switch.

All of the other "lp" filter options
will work with this filter as well.

=item B<-T text>

indicates that the input file is plain text.  The way in which files of this
type are printed is a system which may be made by the system administrator.
When you first install PPR, F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_text> is a link to
F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_lp>.  The system administrator may choose to
substitute a script which invokes a different text-to-PostScript filters
such as B<a2ps>.

=item B<-T postscript>

indicates that the input file is already in PostScript format and thus
does not require filtering.  Since no filter is invoked, the filter options
have no effect.

=item B<-T pcl>

indicates that the input file is in HP PCL format. The current distribution
of PPR does not have a PCL to PostScript converter so this option will not
work unless you provide one.  If you provide one, you should install it as
F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_pcl>.

=item B<-T dotmatrix>

indicates that a generic dot matrix printer filter should be applied to the
input file.  This filter converts an Epson compatible printer
language to PostScript.  This includes the commands of the Epson LX-80, Epson
FX-850, and NEC Pinwriter 6.  The colour option of the Pinwriter 6 is
emulated, colour output will be produced on colour PostScript printers.
Partial support exists for the command sets of other printers but it has
neither been completed nor tested.  The proportionally spaced font of the
Epson FX-850 is emulated using Courier.

This filter understands many of the common options such as "noisy=",
"duplex=", and "charset=".  For a description of these options, see the
description of the B<-o> switch.  The default value of the "charset" option
is "CP437".  This filter also supports the following options which are
unique to the dotmatrix filter:

The B<-o "emulation="> option sets specific emulation modes to more closely
emulate specific printers.  The recognized values are "B<epson>",
"B<proprinter>", and "B<p6>".  The value "epson" means to interpret the
commands as an Epson LX-80 or FX-850 would.  The value "proprinter" means to
emulate an IBM proprinter, but it has not been well tested and may be
incomplete.  The value B<p6> means to interpret the commands as an NEC
Pinwriter 6 would and implies "B<pins=24>" as well.  The default is
"B<emulation=epson>".

The B<-o "pins="> option sets the emulator to mimic a 9 pin or a 24 pin
printer.  If "B<pins=9>" or "B<pins=24>" is not used, a 9 pin dot matrix printer
will be emulated unless 24 pin commands are seen on the first pass through
the input file.  The motion commands are interpreted differently in 9 and 24
pin mode.

The B<-o "perfskip="> option sets the perforation skip in lines.  The
default is 0.

The B<-o "narrowcarriage="> option sets 8 inch line narrow carriage
emulation to true or false.  When it is true, text printed at the left
margin will be printed 0.25 inch from the left hand edge of the sheet.

The B<-o "xshift="> option specifies an amount to shift the page image
right.  The units are 72ths of an inch.

The B<-o "yshift="> option specifies an amount to shift the page image down.
The units are 72ths of an inch.

=item B<-T troff>

indicates that the input file is Troff source.  If you have Troff or Groff,
F</usr/lib/ppr/fixup/fixup_filters> will build a filter in the form of a shell
script which invokes one of them.

The filter script supplied with PPR assumes that the document uses the
B<man> macro package.  The filter does not have any options.  If you need
more elaborate Troff processing, you should create your own, improved
version of F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_troff>.

=item B<-T cat4>

indicates that the input file is formated for a CAT/4 phototypesetter.  This
is an old Troff output format.  No such filter is provided with PPR.
If you write one, you should install it as F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_cat4>.

=item B<-T ditroff>

indicates that the input file is in Ditroff (Device independent Troff)
output format.  This is the format of the output file produced by modern
versions of Troff as well as Groff.  If you have Groff's PostScript filter
or Troff's dpost and postreverse, PPR will build a shell script called
"F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_ditroff>" to act as the filter.  This filter does not
have any options.

=item B<-T dvi>

indicates that the input file is in TeX DVI format.  The
F</usr/lib/ppr/fixup_filters> script will create the necessary filter
script "/usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_dvi" if it finds DVIPS.

If the B<-o "noisy=yes"> option is used, this filter will allow DVIPS and
MetaFont to print their running commentary output to stderr, otherwise, they
run silently.

By default, this filter automatically generates a config file for DVIPS.
The automatically supplied B<-o> options "B<mfmode=>", "B<freevm=>", and
"B<resolution=>" are used to generate the DVIPS configuration file.

The B<-o "dvipsconfig="> option can override the automatic
generation of a DVIPS configuration file.  The value
of the option is passed to B<dvips> with B<dvips>'s B<-P> switch.

=item B<-T tex>

indicates that the input file is TeX or LaTeX source.  This option requires
TeX, LaTeX, and Perl 4 or 5.

If TeX or LaTeX fails, the log is printed instead of the document.  If the
B<-o "noisy=yes"> option is used, this filter will allow TeX, LaTeX, DVIPS,
and MetaFont to write their running commentary output to stderr, otherwise,
they run silently.  Since this filter passes its output to the DVI filter,
all the other options supported by the DVI filter are supported by this
filter as well.

=item B<-T wp>

indicates that the input file is a WordPerfect document.  This will only
work if F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_wp> is present, executable, and is a suitable
filter.  No such filter is supplied with PPR.

=item B<-T texinfo>

indicates that the input file is in GNU Texinfo format.  A filter script
supplied with PPR will be installed if B<texi2dvi> is in the B<PATH> when
F</usr/lib/ppr/fixup/fixup_filters> is run.  This filter has no options of its
own, but it invokes the DVI filter, so the DVI filter's options may be used.

=item B<-T rtf>

indicates that the input file is in Rich Text Format.  No filter for this
format is supplied.  If you write one you should install it as
"F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_rtf>".

=item B<-T jpeg>

indicates that the input file is a JPEG picture file.  If B<-o "colour=yes">
or B<-o "colour=yes"> option is used with and the other picture format
filters, the picture will not be converted to grayscale.  (The "colour="
option is among the automatically generated default filter options, so you
don't have to enter it on the command line unless you want to force the
filter to generate grayscale output for a colour printer or colour output
for a grayscale printer.)

Most of the picture format filters are shell scripts which call the PBM
utilities and the independent JPEG group's utilities.

=item B<-T gif>

indicates that the input file is a GIF picture file.  PPR's filter for this
format uses the NetPBM utilities.

=item B<-T tiff>

indicates that the input file is a TIFF file.  PPR's filter for this format
uses the NetPBM utilities.

=item B<-T sunras>

indicates that the input file is in Sun raster format.  PPR does not provide
a filter for this format.

=item B<-T plot>

indicates that the input file is in the format of the output of the Berkeley
plot library.  A sample filter in the form of a shell script is provided.
It calls B<plot2ps>.

=item B<-T CIF>

indicates that the input file is in CalTech Intermediate Form graphics
language.  No filter for this format is supplied.  If you write one, you
should install it as "F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/filter_cif>".

=item B<-T bmp>

indicates that the input file is in Microsoft Windows BMP format.  A shell
script which calls NetPBM utilities is provided.

=item B<-T xbm>

indicates that the file is an X-Windows bit map.  The filter is a shell
script which calls NetPBM utilities.

=item B<-T xpm>

indicates that the input file is an X-Windows pixel map.  The filter is a
shell script which calls NetPBM utilities.

=item B<-T xwd>

indicates that the input file is an X-Windows window dump.  The filter is a
shell script which calls NetPBM utilities.

=item B<-T pnm>

indicates that the input file is a Portable Bit Map, Portable Gray Map, or
Portable Pixel Map.  The filter is a shell script which calls NetPBM
utilities.

=item B<-T png>

indicates that the file is in Portable Network Graphics format.  This is a
new format and PPR does not have a filter for it yet.

=back

=head2 Filter Options

Here is a complete list of the B<-o> options.  No filter supports all of these
options.  (The filters which support each option are named in parentheses.)

=over 4

=item B<noisy=>I<boolean>

instructs the filter to print debugging messages
or to refrain.  Some filters (including lp, lp_autolf, fortran, pr,
and dotmatrix) will indicated
which options they do not understand from among those that appear after
"noisy=yes".

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, fortran, pr, tex, texinfo, dvi, and dotmatrix at
the very least)

=item B<color=>I<boolean>

=item B<colour=>I<boolean>

sets filters to produce colour or grayscale.  This option is provided
automatically as a default filter option.

(Supported by:  dotmatrix, all picture format filters)

=item B<freevm=>I<positive_integer>

indicates the printer's free virtual memory in bytes.  This option is
automatically provided as a default filter option.

(Supported by:  tex, texinfo, dvi)

=item B<mfmode=>I<number>

indicate the MetaFont mode to be used to generate fonts for this printer.
This options is automatically provided as a default filter option.

(Supported by:  tex, texinfo, dvi)

=item B<level=>I<positive_integer>

sets the PostScript LanguageLevel for generating code.  At the time of this
writing, the correct value for all existing PostScript implementations is
either 1 or 2.  This option is provided automatically as a default filter
option.

(Supported by:  dotmatrix, most if not all of the image format filters)

=item B<dvipsconfig=>I<name>

sets the argument for DVIPS's B<-P> switch, overriding the default which is
to use an automatically generated configuration file.

(Supported by:  dvi, tex, texinfo)

=item B<resolution=>I<positive_integer>

sets the resolution for code generation to I<positive_integer> DPI.
This option is automatically provided as a default filter option.

(Supported by:  tex, texinfo, dvi, most if not all of the image filters)

=item B<title=>I<string>

sets the title to print a the top of each page.  If this switch is absent, a 
default title (probably from the B<--title> switch or the input file name) 
will be used.

(Supported by:  pr)

=item B<width=>I<integer>

sets the maximum width of the page in columns.  If the input file has more columns, then lines that exceed this width 
will be truncated.

(Supported by:  fortran, pr, lp, lp_autolf)

=item B<mincolumns=>I<integer>

sets the minimum number of columns to be provided on the page.  Even if the
document requires fewer columns than this, the type size will not be reduced
beyond the point required to achieve the specified number of columns.  The
default for this parameter is generally 70, but the default may vary from
filter to filter.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<length=>I<integer>

sets the length of the page in lines.

(Supported by:  pr)

=item B<minlines=>I<integer>

=item B<maxlines=>I<integer>

these two parameters affect how many lines of vertical space is provided on the
page.  If the shortest page in a document is shorter than minlines, pages
are made minlines long, resulting in white space at the bottom of every page.
If the longest page is longer than maxlines, all pages are made maxlines
long, with the result that some pages are split into two or more pages.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<tabwidth=>I<integer>

sets the number of columns between tab stops.  The default is 8.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<pdeflines=>I<integer>

sets the number of portrait mode lines per page for files which do not
contain form feeds.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<ldeflines=>I<integer>

sets the number of landscape mode lines for files which do not contain form
feeds.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<pmlm=>I<dimension>

=item B<pmrm=>I<dimension>

=item B<pmtm=>I<dimension>

=item B<pmbm=>I<dimension>

these set the minimum left, right, top, and bottom margins respectively for
portrait mode.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<lmlm=>I<dimension>

=item B<lmrm=>I<dimension>

=item B<lmtm=>I<dimension>

=item B<lmbm=>I<dimension>

these set the minimum left, right, top, and bottom margins respectively for
landscape mode.

(Suported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<gutter=>I<dimension>

The amount to be added to the margin on the binding edge of the paper.  In
simplex mode this is the left hand side.  In duplex mode this is the left
hand side of odd pages and the right hand side of even pages.  In duplex
tumble mode this is the top side for odd pages, the bottom side for even
pages.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<landscape_lentrigger=>I<positive_integer>

=item B<landscape_asptrigger=>I<real>

These options control when the line printer emulating filters switch from
portrait to landscape mode.  If the page length is unknown (because the file
contains no form-feeds), landscape mode is selected if the maximum line
length exceeds B<landscape_lentrigger>.  If the page length can be determined,
landscape mode is selected if the maximum line length divided by the page
length exceeds the value of B<landscape_asptrigger>.

The default values for B<landscape_lentrigger> and B<landscape_asptrigger>
depend on the paper size, margins, gutter width, and other parameters such
as B<char_height> and B<char_width>.  For letter size paper with margins of
half an inch or so, B<landscape_lentrigger> is about 114 and
B<landscape_asptrigger> is about 1.75.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<fontnormal=>I<fontname>

=item B<fontbold>=I<fontname>

The PostScript name of the font to be used for printing normal and bold
text.  For example, "C<ppr -o 'fontnormal=Times-Roman fontbold=Times-Bold>".
As a general rule only fixed width fonts will yield satisfactory results.

If the font you want is listed in F</usr/share/ppr/lib/fonts.conf> it is easier to specify
its family with the B<fontfamily=> option.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<fontfamily=>I<family>

This option is used to select a different set of fonts.  The default value
is "fixed".  Generally "fixed" means Courier.  You are limited to the font
families which are listed in F<fonts.conf> for the character set you are using.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<charwidth=>I<real>

=item B<charheight=>I<real>

These options inform the filter of the proportions of the fonts selected.  These
will never be needed if the B<fontfamily=> or B<fontnormal=> and B<fontbold=>
options are not used.

The dimensions are expressed as a decimal fraction of the point size.  For example,
the default setting is C<-o 'charwidth=0.6 charheight=1.0'>, which is appropriate
for Courier.

Note that these parameters do not change the point size.  Instead, they allow the filter 
to figure out how many letters will fit on a long at any given point size and how far apart 
the lines should be verticaly.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<charset=>I<name>

sets the character set.  The options include "ASCII", "AdobeStandard",
"ISOLatin1", "CP437", and "KOI8-R".  For a complete list see
F</usr/share/ppr/lib/charsets.conf>.

(Supported by:  dotmatrix, lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<pagesize=>I<pagesize_name>

This sets the page size to be used.  Appropriate values will be inserted in
the "C<%%DocumentMedia:>" comment in an attempt to select paper of the specified size.
The size names are the same as those which appear in *PageSize lines in a
printer's PPD file.  Typical values are "letter" and "a4".  This parameter
is not case-sensitive.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran, dotmatrix)

=item B<orientation=>I<orientation>

This sets the orientation of the lines on the printed page.  Valid settings
are B<portrait>, B<landscape>, and B<auto>.  Filters which cannot
automatically determine whether portrait or landscape is most appropriate
should treat B<auto> as equivelent to either B<portrait> or B<landscape>.

(SUpported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran)

=item B<duplex=>I<mode>

This causes a filter to attempt to select the duplex mode.  Do not confuse
this with the B<-R duplex:> series of switches which attempt to determine
what duplex mode a document wants as well as setting default duplex modes.
Duplex modes set with the B<-o duplex=> switch will override defaults set
with the B<-R duplex:> switch.  Legal values for the B<-o duplex=> switch
are:

=over 4

=item B<duplex=undef>

Do not attempt to influence the duplex mode.

=item B<duplex=none>

Attempt to select simplex mode.

=item B<duplex=tumble>

Attempt to select tumble duplex mode.

=item B<duplex=notumble>

Attempt to select no tumble duplex mode.

Duplex modes set with the B<duplex=> option will be overriden by duplex
options set with the B<-F> switch.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran, dotmatrix)

=back

=item B<mediatype=>I<type>

This sets the media type field in the "C<%%DocumentMedia:>" comment.  By
default this field is left empty.  Typical values for this field as
suggested in the "PostScript Language Reference Manual, Second Edition",
page 659 are "19HoleCerlox", "3Hole", "2Hole", "ColorTransparency",
"CorpLetterHead", "CorpLogo", "CustLetterHead", "DeptLetterHead", "Labels",
"Tabs", "Transparency", and "UserLetterHead".  The value of the mediatype=
option should be considered case-sensitive.

For example, to run a file through the Unix pr program and then print it on
3 hole paper:

	$ ppr -d chipmunk -T pr -o 'mediatype=3Hole' myfile.txt

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran, dotmatrix)

=item B<mediaweight=>I<real>

This sets the weight field in the "C<%%DocumentMedia:>" comment.  The value
should be a real number.  The units are grams per square metre.  The default
is 0 which means no specific weight is requested.

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran, dotmatrix)

=item B<mediacolour=>I<colour_name>

=item B<mediacolor=>I<colour_name>

A filter may use this option to set the colour field in the
"C<%%DocumentMedia:>" comment.  Typical values are "white", and "blue".

(Supported by:  lp, lp_autolf, pr, fortran, dotmatrix)

=item B<pins=9>

=item B<pins=24>

sets the Dotmatrix filter to emulate a 9 or 24 pin printer.

(Supported by:  dotmatrix)

=item B<emulation=>I<emulation_name>

sets the make or model of printer to emulate.  The choices are "epson",
"proprinter", and "p6".

(Supported by:  dotmatrix)

=item B<perfskip=>I<positive_integer>

sets the number of lines to skip at the "perforation".

(Supported by:  dotmatrix)

=item B<narrowcarriage=>I<boolean>

sets narrow carriage (8 inch) dotmatrix printer emulation.

(Supported by:  dotmatrix)

=item B<xshift=>I<integer>

=item B<yshift=>I<integer>

specify an amount to shift the page image to the right and up
respectively.  The units are 72ths of an inch.

(Supported by:  dotmatrix)

=back

