#
# ppr-xfm.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2000, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
# documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided
# that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that
# copyright notice and this permission notice appear in supporting
# documentation.  This software and documentation are provided "as is" without
# express or implied warranty.
#
# Last revised 13 December 2000.
#

=head1 NAME

ppr-xfm - Simple file manager interface for PPR

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-xfm> I<destination> [I<file1 ... fileN>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The shell script B<ppr-xfm> and the B<ppr-xgrant> program are designed to be
used with the X-Windows file managers such as Xfm.

To use B<ppr-xfm> with Xfm, you should create one item in the Applications
window for each printer.  The icon "printer.xpm" is a good one to use.  The 
"Push action" should be "exec /usr/lib/ppr/bin/ppr-xfm I<destname>".  The 
"Drop action" should be "exec /usr/lib/ppr/bin/ppr-xfm I<destname> $*".

If you drop files into the icon in the Applications window, they will be
printed.  If you double click on the icon, a queue listing will be
presented.

When jobs are submitted through B<ppr-xfm>, the responder "xwin" is used.
The xwin responder will not work unless the user "ppr" has permission to
pop up windows on your X-Windows display.  In order to grant the permission, 
you should run the program F</usr/lib/ppr/bin/xpprgrant> at the start of 
your X session.

Some versions of Bash do not work with Xfm.  If the files you drop into the
printer icon are not printed, install the shell Ash (included as "/bin/sh" in
NetBSD and as "/bin/ash" in some Linux distributions) and start Xfm with the
command

C<SHELL=/bin/ash xfm E<amp>>

These scripts could be useful even when you are not using
a file manager.  For instance, you could type the command:

C</usr/lib/ppr/bin/ppr-xfm myprinter somefile E<amp>>

to submit a file for printing.  A window would pop up on your X display to
inform you when the job is done.

=head1 SEE ALSO

/usr/doc/xfm-1.3/README (Linux Slackware), ppop(1), ppr(1)
"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler".

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2000.  It was
first released to the public on 26 April 1995.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut

