#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-panel.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2005, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 15 October 2005.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-panel> - open PPR's Perl-Tk control panel

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-panel> [B<-d> I<destname>] [I<filename>] ... ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This command launches a GUI interface for PPR.  It is written in Perl with
the Tk widget set.  It has some overlap in function with the
web-browser-based GUI. Both can display queues, manage jobs, display printer
status, and control printers.  However the web interface has management
functions which the Tk GUI does not and the Tk GUI has a print dialog which
the web interface does not.

=head2 Control Panel

If no arguments are supplied, then the PPR control panel will be opened.  There will
an icon for each printer and each group.  By clicking on the icons one can open
printer and queue control windows.

=head2 Queue Display and Control

To skip the PPR control panel and open a queue display and control window, use B<-d>
I<destname>.  For example:

	$ ppr-web -d myprn

=head2 Job Submission

If non-option command line parameters are present, they are assumed to be
the names of files to be submitted to the indicated print queue.  A print dialog
will be opened.  This dialog will allow the user to select a different
printer, select printer options, and select options provided by PPR such as
multiple copies.  If the I<-d> option is used, then the indicated queue will
be selected (though the user can still use the drop-down list to select a
different one).

=head2 GUI Icons and Menu Entries

If you are running a GUI such as KDE or Gnome which has desktop icons or a
start menu, this command can be used as the the action command.

If the icon or menu entry is configured to run B<ppr-panel> without arguments,
then if you double click on the icon or select the menu entry the
control panel will open as described in section Control Panel above.  If you
drop files on the icon a print dialog will open to allow you to select a printer
as described in section Job Submission above.

If the icon or menu item is configured to run B<ppr-panel> with the arguments
B<-d> I<queuename>, then double clicking on the icon (or selecting the menu
entry) will open the queue display and control window as described in section
Queue Display and Control above.  Dropping files on the icon will open a print
dialog with the indicated queue already selected.

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2005.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
