#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-index.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 7 March 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-index> - Scan system and create indexes of things PPR can use

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-index> [B<--delete>] [B<fonts>] [B<ppds>] [B<filters>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program scans the directories listed in the [fonts] section of
F</etc/ppr/ppr.conf> and builds an index of the fonts it finds in those
directories.  Once fonts are in the index, PPR can download them when
printing if the job contains DSC comments requesting font downloading.

This program scans the directories listed in the [ppds] section of
F</etc/ppr/ppr.conf> and builds an index of the PPD files it finds in those
directories.  The web interface refers to this index when displaying the
list of available PPD files.

This program searches the PATH for programs which can be used by PPR filter
scripts to convert files in various formats to PostScript.  After gathering
information, this program will create usable filter scripts from a
collection of prototype scripts.  If more than one prototype scripts could
be used, it automatically chooses what it considers to be the best one.  If
the necessary programs for a particular prototype filter script can't be
found, no usable script will be created and if there already is one it will
be removed.

You should run this program anytime you install or remove software that
might be used to convert files to PostScript.  Examples include NetPBM,
Acroread, and HTMLDOC.  This program is run automatically once a day from
PPR's crontab.

=head1 FILES

The font database is stored in the file F</var/spool/ppr/fontindex.db>.

The PPD file database is stored in the file F</var/spool/ppr/ppdindex.db>.

The prototype filters scripts are found in F</usr/lib/ppr/fixup/>.  The
usable filter scripts created by this program are deposited in
F</usr/lib/ppr/filters/>.  When this program is run from cron, the output is
logged in F</var/spool/ppr/logs/ppr-indexfilters>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
