#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-tff2ps.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 6 March 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

ppr-ttf2ps - Convert a TrueType font to PostScript format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-ttf2ps> [B<--type3>] [B<--type42>] I<filename>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a demonstration program for PPR libttf library.  As such it will not
ordinarily be required when using PPR.  It takes as input a TrueType font
file in the format used on Microsoft Windows and Unix systems and converts
it to one of two PostScript formats.

=over 4

=item B<--type42>

Generate a PostScript type 42 font file.  This keep the font data in
TrueType format.  Such a font file will work only on PostScript printers
with internal TrueType rasterizers.  This is the default.

=item B<--type3>

Convert the outlines to PostScript code and generate a type 3 font.  This
conversion throws away all of the hinting, so the type quality will be a
little crude.  However it should work on any PostScript printer.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
