#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-hexdump.1.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 15 January 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-hexdump> - Print a hexadecimal dump of stdin on stdout

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-hexdump>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program reads stdin and prints a hex dump to stdout.  This hex dump is
in the traditional MS-DOS style.  PPR provides this program as a tool for
examining files with non-printable characters such as PCL files.

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
