#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppr-clean.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 7 March 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

B<ppr-clean> - Remove temporary files and old cache files left by PPR

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppr-clean> [B<--all-removable>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program removes old temporary files which may be been left behind by
PPR when it was editing configuration files or processing print jobs.  It is
normally run once a day from Cron.

=over 4

=item --debug

Normally B<ppr-clean> displays information about files it is removing, but
the B<--debug> option makes its running commentary much more verbose.

=item --all-removable

The B<--all-removable> option will cause B<ppr-clean> to remove almost any
files that PPR may have created.  In other words, it will delete almost
everything that it can without causing permanent damage to PPR.  This will
delete all queued jobs.  Don't run this while the spooler is running as it
would become very confused.  Don't use this except as part of a script which
uninstalls PPR.

=back

=head1 FILES

The directories from which files are removed include F</var/spool/ppr/> and
its children, F</tmp/>, and some directories in F</etc/ppr/>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler"

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
