#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/pprd.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2005, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
# 
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
# 
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 19 October 2005.
#

=head1 NAME

pprd - PostScript PRinter spooling Daemon

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pprd> [B<--help>] [B<--version>] [B<--foreground>] [B<--stop>] [B<--debug>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This command starts the PPR daemon.  It is a setuid program owned by "ppr".
The first thing this program does is check to see that the real user who
invoked it is "root" or "ppr".  If it is not, then B<pprd> exits immediately.

If the B<--help> or B<--version> switch is used it will print brief usage
information or PPR version information respectively.

The B<--foreground> switch tells B<pprd> not to puts itself in the background.
Use this switch if you are running B<pprd> directly from B<init>.  Note that
using this option does not cause debug and error messages to be sent to stdout.
They continue to go to F</var/spool/ppr/logs/pprd>.

The B<--debug> option implies B<--foreground> but also causes the debug and error
messages to be sent to stdout.

The B<--stop> option shuts down a previously-started instance of B<pprd>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ppr.1>,
L<ppop.1>,
L<ppad.8>,
"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler",
and "Installing and Using PPR".

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2002.  It
was first released to the public on 26 April 1995.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
