#
# mouse:~ppr/src/docs/refman/ppuser.8.pod
# Copyright 1995--2003, Trinity College Computing Center.
# Written by David Chappell.
#
# Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
# modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
#
# * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
# this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
# 
# * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
# notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
# documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
#
# THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
# AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
# IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
# ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE 
# LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR 
# CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF 
# SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS 
# INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN 
# CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) 
# ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE 
# POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
#
# Last modified 30 August 2003.
#

=head1 NAME

ppuser - PPR user database management utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<ppuser> [I<subcommand>] [I<parameters ... >]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is used to manage PPR user charge accounts.  Ordinary users may
run the B<ppuser show> subcommand.  All other subcommands require that the
user be "root", "ppr", or be listed in F</etc/ppr/acl/ppuser.allow>.

=over 4

=item B<ppuser add> I<username> 'I<real name>' I<authcode> I<initialbalance> I<cutoff> I<life>

Adds a user to the accounting database.

I<Username> is the username that, paired with a password, the user will use
for logging in.

I<Real name> is the name B<user name> should be translated to before it is
used in queue listings or banner pages.  (For example, if I<user name> is
"jandrews", I<real name> might be "Joseph Andrews".)

I<Authcode> is the password which will identify the user.  This field is
not used and will be removed in the future.  For now, you should set it to a
dummy value such as the empty string.

I<Initialbalance> is the user's starting balance.  I<Cutoff> is the balance
below which printing priviledges should be denied.

I<Life> is the lifetime of the account.  It is measured in days of
inactivity.  PPR will not delete charge accounts automatically, a separate
program must be employed to compare the period of inactivity to the life
parameter.  Such a program is not included in the current distribution.

=item B<ppuser delete> I<username>

Deletes the indicated user.

=item B<ppuser show> I<username>

Shows the indicated user's account information.

=item B<ppuser authcode> I<username> I<authcode>

This subcommand has been removed.

=item B<ppuser deposit> I<username> I<amount>

Deposits money in amount I<amount> into the indicated user's account.

=item B<ppuser withdraw> I<username> I<amount>

Withdraws the indicated amount I<amount> of money from the indicated
account.  This command used when a user makes a cash withdrawal from the
account, assuming that you permit cash withdrawals.

=item B<ppuser charge> I<username> I<amount>

Assess a charge of I<amount> against the indicated account.  PPR does
this automatically when posting a charge for printing.

=item B<ppuser correction> I<username> I<amount>

Makes a correction to the indicated user's account.  If I<amount> is
positive, the amount of money in the user's account will increase, if it is
negative, the amount of money in the account will decrease.  Generally this
will be used to issue a credit for a botched print job.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

To set up a new account for John Jones with an initial deposit of $10.00, a
cutoff when he is overdrawn by more than $2.50 and to have his account
disappear if it is unused for a year:

C<$ ppuser add jjones "John Jones" "" 10.00 -2.50 365>

Note the empty I<authcode> field.

Now lets assume that the operator made an error and Mr. Jones' was printed
on the wrong kind of paper.  We post a refund by issuing a $1.55 positive
correction to his account:

C<$ ppuser correction jjones 1.55

Oops!  We entered that as 155 rather than 1.55.  We had better reverse the
erroneous correction and issue a new one:

C<$ ppuser correction jjones -155>
C<$ ppuser correction jjones 1.55>

Later Mr. Jones inquires about his balance.  The operator checks his account
status:

C<$ ppuser show jjones>

Mr. Jones sees that his account is running low.  He hands the operator $10
to deposit.  The operator puts the money in the till and runs this command:

C<$ ppuser deposit jjones 10.00>

Mr. Jones is printing his term paper and has directed the operator to bind
it in a handsome blue cover.  There is a $2.50 charge for the cover and the
service.  The operator manualy posts the charge:

C<$ ppuser charge jjones 2.50>

Now Mr. Jones is leaving us and wants the $9.50 remaining in his account.  We
run this command and hand him the cash:

C<$ ppuser withdraw jjones 9.50>

=head1 FILES

The user account database is kept in the file "F</etc/ppr/charge_users.db>".

If the file "F</var/spool/ppr/logs/ppuser>" exists and is writable by the
user "ppr", then all B<ppuser> commands are logged there.

=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

Exit codes for ppuser are defined in the source code file
"F<include/util_exits.h>".

=head1 BUGS

If you choose to compile PPR without GNU DBM and don't provide an
alternative to the GNU DBM based backend, this program will be
non-functional.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<ppr.1>, L<ppop>, L<ppad>, L<pprd.8>,
"PPR, a PostScript Print Spooler",
"Installing and Using PPR".

=head1 HISTORY

PPR was written at Trinity College during 1993--2003.
It was first released to the public on 26 April 1995.

=head1 AUTHOR

David Chappell, Trinity College Computing Center, Hartford, Connecticut.

=cut
